---
layout: post
title: ST558 Project 2 Reflection
---

## Project Summary

For this project, I worked closely with my partner [Yu Bai](https://yzb103.github.io/). We analyzed bike sharing data from the Capital bikeshare system in Washington, DC. This data consists of daily counts for the years 2011 and 2012. The goal of the analysis was to predict the count of casual users of the bike sharing program based on multiple variables. We first summarized the data and examined the variables included. We decided to further explore five variables:

* `season` - winter, spring, summer or fall
* `workingday` - whether the day is a work day (not a holiday or weekend)
* `weathersit` - weather situation (clear, misty, light precipitation, heavy precipitation)
* `atemp` - Temperature feel in degrees Celsius
* `hum` - humidity level

Included are some summary graphs and statistics around these in particular. We then used both linear regression methods and ensemble learning methods to create models to predict the `casual` variable. There is daily data included, and code used to automate the creation of a report for each day (Monday, Tuesday, etc.). 

## Project Reflection

### What would you do differently?
I think had we had more time, we would have liked to explore integration of hourly data into the analysis. Understanding how the hourly usage rates interacted with the variables we discussed earlier would be quite intriguing. I did explore the hourly data set briefly, and each hour has a separate weather situation, temperature and humidity. I think that having a more in depth analysis of this data in particular would be interesting to see exactly how weather affects bike sharing.


### What was the most difficult part for you?
The automation of the daily reports was the hardest part. Although I have worked with RMarkdown before, I have never automated it in this fashion. We ran into some errors around the parameters not being found and that required some investigation to solve. Overall, I think that it was an enjoyasble project and definitely valuable to have this automation experience.

### What are your big take-aways from this project?
I think that the biggest take-away is how simple it can be to share data science projects with the community. Using the tools and resources from this course, I have been able to work with a partner and both work on the same code to create a project together. Beyond that, we were able to automate reports from our data that allows for the same code to be run on multiple levels of a variable, in this case the day. Finally, being able to create a website to store the project and a blog to reflect on the projet, these are all tools and resources I knew nothing about 2 months ago.

To view this project in full, visit the Github Pages site [here](https://pseudonym-code.github.io/ST558-Project2/) or the Project [repository](https://github.com/yzb103/ST558_Project-2).

Thanks!
