---
layout: post
title: Thoughts About Data Science
---
Data science is a term that has grown to mean many things, especially in the business world. There tends to be a blurred line between statistics, business intelligence, computer science, and data science. In the end, all of these distinct fields are often grouped into the data science realm. In this blog post, I will go through a couple questions specific to the job role of a data scientist and attempt to shed some light on this particular field in my own opinion. 

- What do you think being a data scientist is about? 

Being a data scientist is about taking data and telling a story with it. Gathering data and using it to solve problems is the very core of data science, and is especially seen in business, where companies have built up stockpiles of data from previous years. Now that data is able to be harnessed to solve present-day problems. Data science is also about compounding multiple different fields and using the expertise in each to put towards these problems. These fields include statistics, computer science, and even consulting or sales expertise, on top of a good understanding of the subject matter. In the end, data science is all about using existing data to predict, solve, or prevent a present-day issue. 

- What do you see as the major duties and/or knowledge areas?  

Data science as a field is all about combining multiple knowledge areas to solve problems. It takes a little bit of statistical knowledge, a little bit of computer programming knowledge, and a good amount of topical expertise. Data scientists generally specialize in a specific domain and use the extra subject matter knowledge to answer specific questions in that industry. Many of the technical skills required for these roles include SQL, Python or R, and experience with machine learning. Depending on the team composition, a bigger emphasis on one or the other of these skills may be necessary. Some teams have distinct data engineers, data scientists, statisticians, and machine learning engineers. Others only have one data scientist. Knowing at least at a base level of all of these roles is required for a data scientist to be successful. Duties can range from pulling data, collecting data, and cleansing data, to creating machine learning models and presenting the results. It really is a versatile field and every ‘data science’ role is different.

- What differences/similarities do you see between data scientists and statisticians? 

In many ways, these positions are similar and are often used interchangeably. It can be argued that all data scientists are statisticians of a sort, but not all statisticians are data scientists. Statisticians are those who are classically trained in the theory and methods of statistics. Often, this is used to find the simplest model to fit a data and quantify the uncertainty associated with this model. Data science is arguably the more technical role in a programming sense, and prediction is generally the end goal for data scientists’ projects. While the base statistical inference is the same, data scientists will generally be working with more data and more complex models. Prediction accuracy is often the end result, and models working around this are often more complex when compared to those of a classical statistician’s. In the end, both parties use data to solve and model problems, and use the models to answer questions or hypotheses. Often, these work hand-in-hand.

- How do you view yourself in relation to these two areas?

I believe I am near the middle of statistics and data science, though lean closer to the data science side. Pursuing a Masters in Statistics has given me the theory and statistical background to be able to understand the models and concepts used in data science and use that expertise to explain these in a concise and understandable manner. Although lots of what I do at IBM revolves around coding and programming and probably fits the more traditional data science definition, I am beginning to be able to use some of the statistical methods in my work. I really enjoy machine learning and hope to be able to move more into the machine learning and AI realm. In my free time, I often model baseball data, both using classic statistical modelling as well as machine learning. So regardless of whether you call me a statistician, a data scientist, or even a nerd, I love learning new methods and applying it to data!
